---
path: "/santa-cruz-chinatown"
title: "Santa Cruz Chinatown"
author: "Karen Tei Yamashita"
type: "Fiction"
source: "../../icons/4.jpg"
interview: "No"

---
Walking Tour: Start near the pond with water lilies in San Lorenzo Park off Dakota Street. Walk over the San Lorenzo River by way of the Chinatown walking bridge. Cross River Street, and walk down China Lane, stopping just behind Mobo Sushi. Find the commemoration plaque for old Chinatown. Continue walking toward Front Street, turning toward the clock tower on Water. Near the clock tower, find the Mission steps and walk up. From the top of the steps, walk down School Street past the old Santa Cruz Mission, crossing the plaza, down High Street, and over the highway overpass. Make a left after the overpass and walk on the bike path along Cabrillo Highway until you reach Evergreen Cemetery. Find the Chinese arch.

"Forget it Jake. It's Chinatown" 

Chinatown by Robert Towne

Chinatowns have bad reputations. Poor people. Illegal folks. Gambling dens. Opium. Prostitutes. Secret societies. Underground tunnels with trap doors. Kungfu killers. Some of this is true because, why not? It makes good storytelling. And it's part of true history: the coolie trade, Chinese Exclusion Act, Great San Francisco Earthquake, paper names, Boxer Rebellion. But I'm not here to repeat history. Just saying that Chinatowns are microcosmic worlds justified by the past. Outsiders visit like tourists, pretend no one can see them eating cheap chop suey while partaking in so-called illicit activities. They go there to hide. So when they say there were gambling houses in Chinatown or that a Chinese pimp named Den Kee or a white lady named Madame Pauline once ran brothels down the street, all frequented mostly by white men -- the common and the prominent, it's probably true as well. But when I was a kid growing up, scooting on a bicycle past old clapboard houses over dirt roads, free to hide in the tules to fish in the San Lorenzo, there behind my ma's vegetable garden of mustard greens and winter melon, and to hang out on creaky wooden porches with old Chinamen who made sure I had a piece of candy, or let me lick out of an open can of sweetened condensed milk, or showed me how to set off firecrackers in the street, what did I care about the place's reputation? I was at home in the present. Now I know what the old Chinamen knew. I was the future. They were the past.

One day I saved up to get myself a camera, and after that I was never without it. It was an old used German Rolleicord, with a flip-up top and window you peered into from above. I learned how to adjust the apertures, develop film, print my own work. I used to get copies of US Camera and study everything in it, wearing out the pages. That's where I saw photos by Edward Steichen, Walker Evans, Dorothea Lange, and Arnold Genthe. It was Genthe's photos of San Francisco Chinatown that got to me. I could do that, and, to be honest, I could do it better. I walked from my Chinatown to school to my job at the camera shop, back to home on China Lane, and saw my world framed and focused through the Rolleicord. I spent every spare moment hanging around the  Chee Kong Tong, what outsiders called the joss temple. It was where the old bachelors conspired for the Chinese nation, got loans and charity, celebrated, prayed, lived, and died. It was an all- purpose benevolent association. At the end of a long life, setting rail ties, doing laundry, cooking, picking plums, fishing sardines, drying seaweed, abalone and squid, they hung their hats at the Tong house. They had no families except each other and us. I followed them around, watching them gamble, make tofu, dry fish, dig gardens, kill chicken, smoke cigars, putter about, talk shit, and lose their memories. When they died off, one by one, they got buried at Evergreen. Who would have thought? Now, the only thing we got left of them are my photos: Lee Lam Bok, Ah Fook, Yee Hen Bok, Mook Lai Bok, Moon Lai Bok, Ah Chin Bok.

They had a party for Ah Chin Bok when he turned 90. Of course, no one knew his real birth date. Ah Chin probably made it up, something auspicious. I did the calculations, and it was possible. He said he came with his dad just before the Civil War. His dad was recruited to cook for the army, and he went along as the water boy. What army? we asked. The Yanks! He got insulted, but that's why we asked every time. Who do you think? By the end of the war, he was wearing the blue uniform and carrying a rifle. How old was he? Fifteen? His dad was killed in the crossfire. Buried him at Gettysburg. I was there, he said, when President Lincoln gave his four-score speech. Even in his old age, his eyes filled with tears. We freed the slaves. Ah Chin shook his head. He was not a black man nor a slave, but he knew irony. Even though he fought for the Union, they never made him a citizen. What did Ah Chin do from after the Civil War up to his birthday at 90? It was a long 75-year trek from Gettysburg to California, but it always began with the Civil War. Dynamiting tunnels for the railroad, cooking out of covered wagons, panhandling for gold, cattle droving, working the harvest south to north. All that labor with nothing to show for it but the memory. One day he settled into the Tong house. Enough. We toasted Ah Chin again and again, and when he was drunk enough, he would sing: Mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the Lord. His

truth is marching on! Glory! Glory! Hallelujah! As He died to make men holy, let us die to make men free! His truth is marching on!

When Ah Chin died, the Tong put up money for his funeral. Used to be they got two horse- driven wagons, but by Ah Chin's time, they got two open trucks. First truck was filled his leftover clothing and food, fruit like oranges and bananas, and cakes and chicken. They put together a band and played from the truck, you guessed it, the Battle Hymn of the Republic. In the second truck was Ah Chin in his coffin. We followed the trucks through town, winding around past the places Ah Chin knew, giving him a last look. At Evergreen, they burned his affects in the stove up there. He didn't have much, but burning it meant it went with him, plus paper money for the road home. Then they finished roasting the chicken in the oven. The town kids and the hobos all followed our processions but waited at the cemetery gate, like they were being proper mourners at a distance.

The crisp burnt barbecue smell of chicken skin wafting over the graves must have reached their noses. The offerings were placed around the grave with prayers and incense. Then the procession marched away, past the poor kids and hobos, who removed their hats and bowed, waiting patiently for the last Chinese to disappear down the hill. I don't know what they thought, thought Chinese were dumb, leaving all that food, baskets of fruit and that roasted chicken there for the ghosts, but it was Ah Chin's spirit that would be fed because they were fed.

Finally, the war came for us too. I got into the Navy and took photos for the military. I got to travel, take more photos, and then it was time to come home, finish school, and do what I always wanted to do: marry my girlfriend, start a photography business, and make a life of it. In 1955, Steichen published the photographic book, The Family of Man. One day, I was going to be one of those photographers. But that was the same year that the rain fell like crazy and torrential waters rose from the San Lorenzo. I slogged home from work, my camera slung around my neck. I thought I could document the storm. It was Christmas, but when I saw a tree with its glass ball trimmings floating through the streets, that's when I started to run, camera thumping hard with my heart against my chest. Just beyond my house, I could see an old Chevy trundling like a big boat through the backyard, busting the wall of the chicken coop. The chickens who could escape were squawking on the roof when the whole thing just floated away. I saw a wall of water with great chunks of Ma's garden rising over China Lane, and there was Ma wading with the grandkids, little George in her arms, and clutching Linda behind, her dress afloat like a yellow lotus. I grabbed Linda, and we struggled for higher ground. That was the end of my Chinatown. The end of China Lane, the gambling and boarding houses, and the Chee Kong Tong joss temple. Since my people arrived for the Gold Rush as early as 1849, there had been many renditions of China Camps and Chinatowns, all finally destroyed by fire and flood. Stubbornly, folks got back on their feet, went to work again -- cooking, washing, fishing, harvesting, building. But even if we did the work, no one really wanted the heathen Chinese. Superstitious Chinese say the number four is unlucky, means death. Maybe the fourth rendition of Chinatown was anyway doomed. So my home drowned and disappeared forever. If you look for traces, the watermarks might still be there.

***

My daughter was born just as Chairman Mao was dying, September 9, 1976. Depending on your point of view, to make such a claim can be subversive or, well, I don't know. For me personally, something ended and began. The others before her all died, failed. How many were there? I lost count. She was the first and only who survived, but I was sure when she opened her eyes and we first met that I would not let them take her from me. I examined her tiny palm; he would have hidden the truth there. I studied the tiny lines in her delicate hands, memorizing every trace, not knowing how to read her mystery, but I knew I would find a way to her freedom and to her future.

How we left and where we went is complicated. Perhaps we crossed the border into the Soviet Union or into Hong Kong or into North Korea or Japan. At those crucial crossings, he was still there with us, worried himself about the transition that must inevitably occur and unsure about which side would prevail in power. His credentials were impeccable. When things cooled over, he was sure that his expertise, his science would be required, or, if necessary, that he could sell his knowledge to the enemy. She was his ticket. As long as my breasts were full and she was fed and content, he was pleased. Therefore, in those days, he made sure I was well nourished. Perhaps that is why I nursed her for so many years, even after she and I made ourselves disappear. One night, we left him in a stupor, crept away and ran and ran.

We moved from Chinatown to Chinatown across the earth. You would be surprised to know how many Chinatowns exist. Even if there is no Chinatown, there is always a Chinese restaurant. In every country in the world, Chinese live. It was like Chinese closed their eyes, spun the globe, and stopped it with their index finger pointing somewhere, and that's where they settled. There we hid pretending to be like every other Chinese. Chinese, of course, are not all the same, but the pretense was useful. I made a life for us in any way possible, cleaning houses, washing dishes, collecting trash, but eventually, I found that I could sketch portraits or paint famous landmarks and sell them to tourists. The Eiffel Tower. Ponti di Rialto. Pão de Acúcar. Big Ben. Taj Mahal. Statue of Liberty. Pyramids of Giza. I pretended modestly that my talent was recently acquired, that I had not dedicated years of study to create the social realist posters to promote the cultural revolution, Chairman Mao at the radiant center surrounded by the farmers and industrial workers and the People's Liberation Army. We moved from place to place. If I sensed that we had become in any way comfortable, it was time to leave. He was never far away. My daughter came to understand this feeling, an anxious tugging of the heart, a whiff of something in the air, and her look also said that it was time.

But finally, I landed a good job in San Francisco in advertising, and after so many years of fleeing what had become his shadow, tentatively, we tried to stay. Even so, we never remained in any apartment or house very long; we had become used to our discomforts. Language and learning came easily to her. But of course. She had his scientific mind, the one he had crafted with cunning. What of me did she possess? I remember sleepless nights staring at her, wondering, feeling her again moving inside me. Would there be nothing in her of me? She was beautiful. I was plain. She was brilliant. I was trained. How many times had I examined the palm of her hand? It had not changed but become more defined. She moved through school quickly, almost as if she knew we could not afford to lose any time. She finished high school and college with honors in anthropology and genetic biology. This worried me, but I said nothing to dissuade her. Then she chose the field of forensic anthropology.

One day, she came home with a worried face. Despite her intuitive knowing about our constant wandering to hide, I sensed a difference in her concern and feared her questions as always. Our lives, I had tried to pretend, were part of an adventure that others would never know. She had volunteered to work the midnight shift at the university laboratory, and, always anxious for her safety, I remained awake, waiting for her return at dawn. Ma, she said, always seeing me arise from thesofa,thetelevisionasnowybuzz,whyhaven'tyougonetobed? Thistime,shesatnexttome and leaned her head into my shoulder. How are the specimen? I asked innocently. I knew her dedication, that the tests had to be conducted around the clock, and she was the only student who agreed to come at that hour. She answered, I spoke to the janitor Mr. Nelson tonight. He always comes in late to clean. He said he noticed my devotion to this work, that he did not meet many students like me. I nodded sleepily, but she continued. Ma, he wanted to warn me. I sat up awake, suddenly afraid. Warn? Yes, he said that he worried that science might take away my soul. He said that Dr. Q had approached him one day to ask if he would offer his daughter to participate in her experiment. His daughter, Ma, is mentally disabled. Tears filled my daughter's eyes. I took her hands in my own, and as I had done time and time again, I traced her lines softly with my fingertips. It had become our way of consoling each other. She did not go back to the lab. I knew then that, even if we were separated forever, he had failed.

***

I first saw her at the restaurant. She was with a group of professors who usually came to dine there. These professors, as usual, joked casually with me, as if Chinese restaurants should of course have Chinese waitresses, even if the owners were white and the cooks in the back were all Mexican. I learned it was just a game we played, but maybe it made the food taste authentic. Later I discovered that they were testing her with their questions, trying to demonstrate a friendly scrutiny, showing her that there was Chinese food, Sichuan Chinese to be exact, in our not-so-provincial town, that the chili dumplings were exquisite. She laughed with them. Took sips of wine and said smart things. By dessert, they were very satisfied, very impressed. But I must have been a great distraction and almost thwarted her chances for the position for which she was vying. I knew she knew that I, this waitress, who came to host the table felt her shock of recognition. I might have dropped my tray, trembling, a great blushing wave searing my face and neck. If we were not twins, what could we be? I watched her leave, her eyes fixed away while her forced composure cast anxiety in her wake. Not one of the professors seemed to have noticed anything awry. It's a cliché of course to say that we all look alike. It would be a long while before I saw her again.

I knew later that she was given a position in the department of anthropology, and very soon after she became involved in a local project at the Evergreen Cemetery behind the Harvey West ballpark and the Portuguese Hall. The cemetery was exhuming the bones of the old Chinese buried there. It was a 40 by 80-foot plot against the hill, the stones worn and fallen, the Chinese characters now unreadable. But perhaps she could read the bones after all these years. That was her job. I knew she loved this work. Later, she told me that it might be possible to understand diseases in the past by examining and taking samples from the old bones. She could learn about their labor, what they ate, how they aged. I understood that stories were in those bones.

One day, she came to the restaurant alone. We sat at a table and stared at each other over tea. She admitted that she had been afraid to return. We compared stories. We were both born in Canton, but I had been adopted by a Kuomintang family who fled to Taiwan. Our birthdates were different. I was older by two years. Adopted? Do you think? She pondered. There is only one person who can answer that. Can you come with me to San Francisco?

She chose to drive up Highway 1 along the coast, starting early to enjoy the scenic ride but also to take our time, stopping in Pescadero for lunch or parking at the lighthouse to look out for whales moving in herds south. We were tentative in our conversation, trying out one story or another. She was not married, had no boyfriend. I had one daughter who lived with her grandparents in Taipei. My daughter's father had left for Macao, and we never saw him again. I sent money to my daughter every month. I had not seen her in three years. The twists and turns, however, of her life with her mother, always moving, left me dizzy. I could not imagine such a road. My life had not been easy, but much simpler by comparison. I feel, she said, that I am always being followed. She looked at me significantly. Maybe you will help me change that.

In San Francisco, I walked with her into large rooms with high ceilings of an industrial warehouse remodeled into an art gallery. On the walls were hung enormous paintings, portraits of Chinese families posed before world famous tourist spots. I perused the catalog entitled, Intellectual Property. The style remembered the Chinese posters I knew as a child, propaganda of the People's Republic, but surreally revisioned, happy camera faces slightly grotesque, weary. I moved from painting to painting, and felt an uncanny twinge, feeling the eyes of a center personage always following the viewer. Waiters came with trays of canapés and thin glasses of champagne, tiny bubbles festive and sparkling. Fancy people moved languidly with their glasses making eye contact and smart comments.

She had left me to find her mother, the artist of these paintings. I turned to see her leading an elegant woman, hair coifed perfectly, dressed in blue silk and pearls. As she approached, her face drained of color, consumed in panic. Her glass crashed, and she crumbled to her knees. I dropped to catch her, and she stared into my face in horror. No, she cried. He promised. He lied. The crowd spread around us, and we picked her mother up. Ma, she asked. Are we twins? No, she cried. Sisters? Yes. No, no, no. She pleaded, Ma I thought you'd be happy. A good surprise. I found her. No, no, no. She grabbed me, pulling at my hands and staring into my open palms. Her fingers traced the lines as if scripted characters. She seemed to understand something there, nodded, then curled my fingers into a fist, and grasping that fist, pulled it to her heart. Words rasping, tears washed her powdered face. Girls, he told me, disposable. Experiments. She commanded me. You must not let him. The eyes in the paintings followed us around and around.

At that moment, I saw a Chinese man walk through the crowd toward us. I recognized his face, the same face staring from the paintings. He raised his gun. Three shots. The third shot missed me, and I ran after him, down the dark and empty industrial streets. I realized that I could run, and run fast, overtake him easily. I was surprised. I knew I was strong, but not that strong. I knew I was fast, but not that fast. He stared in a kind of amazed terror at me. I opened my fist to show him my bare palm, and he, too, read its character. He asked in Mandarin: Have you ever been sick? My shock must have revealed the answer. My adopted mother was so proud of my perfect health. Not even a cold or sniffle, ever. He continued: Do you have children? What happened next was intuitive, the prophecy embedded in the palm of my hand. I cracked his neck and heard it lose its breath. I put his body in her car and returned down the coast.

The excavations of the Chinese plot at Evergreen and her reading of the bones were still in process. It was a deep 40 by 80-foot archeological dig, cordoned by yellow tape, but when it was known that she had died tragically, they quickly replaced the bones, finishing the foundations for the memorial arch and commemorative stones for Lee Lam, Chong Lee, Chin Lai, Lou Sing, and "all those Chinese buried at Evergreen and in unmarked graves throughout Santa Cruz County."