---
path: "/guilt"
title: "Guilt — A Dissection"
author: "Frances Hisgen"
type: "Personal Essay"
source: "../../icons/4.jpg"
interview: "No"

---

A few nights ago, I revisited a stack of drafts of essays on my desk that I had been avoiding. A first draft of an application essay was due in a few days---I needed to take the pile and wrestle it into one coherent 650-word personal statement. On the first page of the first essay in the stack, a sentence stood out: "To be mixed race is to have guilt be a part of your essential makeup." I stared at it for some time, tilting my head back and forth and tapping my pen against the desk as I tried to figure out what I had meant to say. Finally, I crossed it out with red pen and a little note to myself in the margin: You aren't making sense. Scrap. Rewrite.

I deleted the sentence, but I can't shake the feeling that I meant to say something important. 

Perhaps I meant to express that part of being mixed race is the feeling of harboring warring halves in one body. Perhaps I felt guilty because I was unable to negotiate the real need to assimilate into American culture and my own desire to celebrate my Chinese heritage. When I was younger, I solved this problem with the same spirit that motivated me to buy both a little American flag and a tiny Chinese flag during a family trip to the United Nations in New York in a flight of globalized fancy right now that seems to come from another time entirely---the weekdays were for English language TV and steak dinners; the weekends were for Chinese school and Kam Man Food boxed lunches. 

The solution was perfect, and yet school was a torment of bringing Tupperware containers of stir-fried noodles to lunch at school and worrying that the smell of the "worms" was seeping out from the neat cubbyholes of L.L. Bean lunch boxes out to smelling distance of Elizabeth Smith and Mary Jones's desks. I started to buy the school lunch and tried to feel a powerful sense assimilated nonchalance when I threw out Styrofoam trays instead of carrying home peanut oil scented tupperware. My Chinese are not a demonstrative people---our love was never expressed verbally; hugs are given only on the most important occasions. This is perhaps the ultimate cliché, but in Chinese culture, food is love. 

My mother is not a woman with much time to cook. When I was in grade school and she was an assistant professor who taught night classes, my dinner was often a packet of instant noodles I boiled myself. She is also not a woman who enjoys cooking---she was both relieved and disturbed when my cooking skills progressed from instant noodles to dinner for the family. Despite her lack of enthusiasm for the kitchen, my mother used to get up early to make me breakfast and pack me a lunch---the more tests I had scheduled, the more labor intensive her creation. My mother has two core beliefs about food: the purpose of food is for brainpower, and the purpose of brainpower is to facilitate a rigorous education. In elementary school, that her cooking would be what sustained me as I experienced the foundation of my education had a symbolic importance, I think, for both of us. I could not miss the importance of my symbolic rejection. 

As I remember it, the experience of rejecting my mother's food was my first experience with guilt. I had felt shame before, of course, when I "borrowed" one of my mother's silk scarfs and ripped it within the hour, or when I stole twenty dollars from my father's wallet so I could buy myself the trashy young adult novels he disapproved of. At first glance, shame and guilt are similar. Both are emotions that thrive off the distance that occurs when an action is dubbed "the wrong thing" and you could have instead chosen to do the "right thing". Both are emotions that also thrive off of fear. Guilt and shame differ only in the person who decides what is right and what is wrong. Shame comes when someone else dubs the action incorrect---shame is the emotion that comes after you fear you have disappointed. Guilt, however, is trickier---guilt comes when you are the person who is disappointed in your own actions; guilt is when you have failed to live up to your expectations for yourself. 

Expectations for yourself is the key here. Guilt is more insidious and lasting than shame because it is an internal judgment. The experience of guilt is so wrenching and difficult to resolve because it touches on the most personal and difficult of endeavors---the creation of self. Guilt comes in the midst of the struggle to find out who you are: what kind of person, with what kind of values; after winning a tentative victory in that battle, you have betrayed what you think you could be. This inability to resolve your actions and sense of the person you want to be leads to paralysis. Guilt is this inaction---inaction because you fear the self-reckoning that needs to occur to resolve the dissonance. Guilt is holding on to a behavior long after you have deemed it wrong because you are afraid to let it go. 

I knew I was hurting my mother when I refused to eat her food. I knew I was creating a wedge between us and I felt guilty. I stayed in the guilt, wallowed in it, almost reveled in it, because I found the task of finding a balance between the European and the Chinese too difficult. It was one or the other for a long while: I embraced American cultural signifiers for years only to have an abrupt switch to identifying as exclusively Chinese when the guilt at denying my Chinese roots tipped over into the space beyond paralysis. 

The switch coincided with my high school years, a period when my mother and I were at war---sparring with raised and raw voices from the moment I got home until the moment I slammed and locked my door at night to keep her out before I went to sleep. I have always felt that my mother and I are too similar to live in close quarters for extended periods of time---we have always moved through cycles of being best friends and not getting along. I can't remember why, but during this period of fighting, the concepts of Chinese mother, Chinese heritage, and Chinese culture began to get tangled up in my head. Somehow, in a period when my mother and I oscillated between not speaking and screaming at each other, my idea of Chinese culture changed to something that could be a representation of my mother. I missed my mother, but both of us are stubborn women and it would be weeks before we mended our disagreement. Somehow, I got it into my head that if I learned everything I could about her culture, it would work out to demonstrating my respect and love for my mother as a person. It was a solution for a time when I was too full of pride to apologize to her and tell her I loved her myself. I decided to put some effort Chinese school and finally learn how to read and write what the white British journalist Anthony Grey once called the "beguiling language". 

Perhaps my relationship with the Chinese language has always been tangled up with guilt and pain---high school was not the first time when I attempted to channel my pain and longing for a better relationship with my mother into learning Chinese. It started when I was eight years old, and the only words I could write were Nihao (hello), Shubao (backpack), and Xiongmao (panda). I walked into Chinese school on the first Saturday after the beginning of the great mother-daughter fight of 2008, and I moved to sit in the front of the classroom instead of in the back. Perhaps I thought she would understand me better if I spoke to her in her own language---and there is something here, for she always seems to hear me screaming across our house better when I scream my request in Chinese. I started with the best of intentions.

Guilt starts with the best of intentions, but those intentions don't prevent you from reverting back to your old habits. I worked hard for the two hours every Saturday in the classroom, but I couldn't bring myself to study when I got home. I picked up my old habit of reading books and lying to my father by telling him I was spending those hours in my room studying for my Chinese tests. My Chinese improved despite the lack of effort outside the classroom, but my guilt only increased. Maybe the essence of my guilt was that, despite my increasing fluency, I felt I wasn't trying hard enough to learn the language and engage with my Chinese heritage---I felt the distance between my desire to learn Chinese and prove to my mother that I loved her and my inability to give up my it free time to do it. 

Perhaps the inability to change bad behavior is the difference between guilt and remorse. You feel terrible when you are guilty, yes, but it is doable to live with that strange feeling and to learn ignore the perpetual reminders---the guilt pangs---that you ought to be doing something to push yourself closer to the vision you have of yourself. Guilt exists in a stage before remorse. You think you can change, but you haven't gotten the place where that desire is genuine and not only motivated by the desire for some sweet release form your conscience. I would call my feeling remorse if I had actually started studying for my Chinese tests. Remorse requires reformed behavior. 

I think probing the entanglements between my relationship with my mother and my guilt is on my mind because I have been spending the summer reading about the Cultural Revolution. My mother was born in 1965, the year the Cultural Revolution began---her childhood, from ages one to eleven, was shaped by terror in ways I cannot even begin to comprehend. I find myself sometimes delirious with gratitude after putting down a book when I realize that I am growing up in a place and a time where I don't have to spend my formative years undoing brainwashing and coping with a specific political trauma. Do I feel guilty because my mother was hurt and I have only escaped living in the small and airless closet of political repression because she was strong and brave and LUCKY enough to get out? 

I don't. I feel guilty because the Cultural Revolution is a life event that is so central to who my mother is and because I run out of the room when she tries to talk about it from her perspective. It is a life event that is so central to who she is, and I prefer to understand it at a distance by reading the clinical statistics of the number of people killed in books written at a safe distance in a living room in Cambridge by American sinologists. I feel guilty because I run out of the room covering my ears when the stories get graphic---when there is some mention of my grandfather in a prison camp or of the fact that my mother was raised by family friends and could only visit her parents in labor camps when she could bring herself to stand for four days and three nights on the train from Shanghai to the Vietnam border. I cannot take it when my mother talks about permanent damage to her memory; when food was scarce, my grandmother fed my uncle first, my grandfather second, and my mother not at all. 

I am guilty because I think I should be a strong enough person to face my mother's story; instead, I run away because it overwhelms me. My guilt might not be, as I wrote in some half-formed essay, about being mixed-race---it might really be about my inability to have the conversation that would allow me to understand my mother as a person with emotions and pain of her own and not just as a person who is here to fulfill my needs. The other guilts---the food guilt, the language guilt---may be symptoms, offshoots, of the larger guilt. If I could only manage to treat my mother's emotions with the same care that I treat the pursuit of learning her language---I could begin to bridge the distance between my desire to be a compassionate person and the reality that I am causing my mother pain. 

Guilt is paralysis---I think I remain paralyzed.