---
path: "/mangoes"
title: "Mangoes"
author: "Swathi Kella"
type: "Personal Essay"
source: "../../icons/22.jpg"
interview: "No"

---

A light broke through the darkness. The cracked brightness fractured the thick, heavy black of the room, slowly breaking through and carving out a coarse rectangle that came to resemble a door. The rupture grew large and great until the grating fluorescence from the hallway flooded in and drowned every corner of the room. It poured through the harsh silhouette standing in the doorway; it spilled out from the gap between his arms and escaped through the spaces between his fingertips.

He entered and flipped on the light switch. The same fluorescence from the hallway now bleached the interior of the flat, revealing scattered mail- all advertisements claiming to miraculously fix the guttered sink or the failing refrigerator- and stray papers on the kitchen counter. Other than that, the room was mostly unadorned, the mark of someone living alone. He had been apart from his family- my mother, my sister, and me- for over a year now, struggling and surviving in America, where, as he struggled to tell himself every day, *anyone could be who they wanted*.

Day to day, he completed his residency in a hospital in the Bronx, New York. He would wake up at five, take the subway to his workplace, and come back to his apartment late at night. It was routine by now, and he had gotten accustomed to it. However, the habituality did little to mask the real questions that had been troubling him; he still did not know when he would be able to send for his family, how soon he would be able to receive his green card to gain the privileges of the Americans beside him, and how to save enough money to secure the best education for his two young girls.

But this night, he would not worry about those problems; instead, he would indulge in a treat from his homeland. From the refrigerator, he pulled out a golden mango, his favorite fruit as a child. It was ripe- you could tell because it was soft, so much so that when my father pressed his palm into it, a little depression remained, and its skin was colored a deep orange freckled with red. Such mangoes are nonexistent in American grocery stores, as the climate for growth has always been unsuitable. To get a mango of this color, my father had to travel to a nearby Indian market, a small community of commodities made available to the immigrants in America who couldn’t quite forget their old fruits, their old spices, their old teas.

He drove the knife through; where the cold metal met the dense pulp, a stream of nectar erupted and flowed down the hilt of the knife and into my father’s palm. It left behind a thick, sticky residue before falling to the counter. Such little messes were everywhere during his childhood days, and the simple drip of mango juice awakened old memories.

My father was born in Andhra Pradesh, an agricultural state in southern India famous for growing rice, cotton, and above all, silk. He grew up playing cricket on the streets of a small, dusty village by the name of Kandisa. Out from the brick houses would pour small, slender boys with tousled black hair and faces darkened by their days in the sun, bobbing in and out of the sugarcane and rice fields. This was 1980, and electricity wouldn’t fully arrive for another ten years; in the dark, the residents would carry kerosene lamps.

Every night, in the slender light of the nighttime moon, my father and his friends could be found nested high in a mango tree. Despite urgent calls from their parents and severe threats that they would be punished by the gods presiding above them, the boys stayed for a time after the dark descended. The boys believed that in the absence of the sun and sights it brought, their sense of vision would fall to disuse. In the silence of the streets and the life that it aroused, their sense of hearing would weaken as well. All that would be left was the sense of touch, the sense of smell, and the sense of taste- the three sense needed to taste a mango. At this time in the night, in their seclusion amidst the trees, the boys believed the mangoes would feel best, smell best, taste best.

As my father bit into the succulent fruit, he would close his eyes and allow the flavor to burst through; he would tell me years later that the first bite he took every night was one he would never forget. The flesh of the fruit was rich in texture, he would say, and in that moment, the senses of touch, smell, and sense were dedicated entirely to the soft fruit in between his teeth. The initial tang would force him to clamp his mouth shut and contort his face, but the following sweetness was comparable to none. Dripping mango juice spared neither my father nor any of his friends as they all scrambled to lick the thick sap that trailed down their arms and left them with sticky hands.

Such was the childhood my father left behind in India. He left behind his village, the trees he stripped of mangoes, and all the friends he shared those mangoes with. He left behind the golden fruit which had become a staple of his daily life. In coming to America, he left behind his own family. He spent his days as a resident, watching the fierce glints in the surgical instruments as the doctors moved them rapidly under the bright operation room light; studying so that he may one day have the chance to use those very instruments; and coming home at night to a darkened apartment, no company and no comfort.

As he cut a piece of the mango in the New World, he was reminded that he would not leave behind his personal history or his culture, for they would follow him here. This journey was a personal one; he given up a life in his hometown for one in a strange world. He had given up the fruits of his hometown for the fruits of the strange world.