---
path: "/autotranslations-of-surveillance"
title: "Autotranslations of Surveillance"
author: "George Abrams"
type: "Poetry"
source: "../../icons/5.jpg"
interview: "No"

---

To call the florida suburbs our first lesson in loneliness: the only house on the street to hang a flag that betrayed us because everyone hangs that flag here. To hang the colonizer's god around our necks to call salvation. To call it survival. To assemble, from every charred scripture, a word to call God. To partition the mountains of a land to call holy to build them into sniper towers. To birth a police state & divinity in the same breath. To inherit drought in unfamiliar currency, say water is always holy once the wells dry. To become both floodwater & ebb; every iris, an ocean we refused to drown in. To follow me on twitter, say i reaaaaaaally like your poems. To watchlist. To track facebook videos of unarmed Palestinians being shot as predictive policing. To pass unto everything your palm grazes, your oppressor's eyes. To midas touch. To pray God watches over His people. To sing God watches over His people. To love a land so much you could never trust that water. To torture via water, starvation, sleeplessness, confinement to coffin-sized boxes. To perceive every second faster than the one that preceded it: to approach death in increasing velocities. To carry the names of CIA torture victims in your family, yet everyone carries those names here. To respond florida, usa when the Tel Aviv checkpoint guard asks where you're from. To be asked are you sure despite. To inherit a geography to call american & exist in the contradiction of it. To write this poem, 2 oceans east, and be called illegal. To un-name Dareen Tatour from this poem; to bleach Edward Said's name from every tenure track. To inherit a tongue of restless death & lexicon -- a rolling-in-our-graves immortal. To disappear, sobbing into a plate of falafel until it becomes israeli. To salt & conquest. To understand space only through finite temporal partitions: to claim any death as before our time & exist in the cross-fire: it was death: it was a door: a light. To exist, in the moment the bullet intersects the skin, at the border of three time-frames simultaneously: 

from the coordinate frame of a gun, every bullet is an exile spat out of its country; from the frame of a country, everyone is a gun to be bullet-filled; from the frame of the bullet, there is no home aside from the torrid air that lifts it -- To exist, at once, as both object & verb in every tense -- To pass unto our children, this inherited paranoia, anxiety, its collapsing timescale, hence making the police state timeless, hence God -- To laugh after being put on the watchlist, say finally you fuckers -- to be a laughing-in-God's-face type of immortal -- To lean into the light, as if it was jealous enough to take us back; as if we weren't ancestored before even drawing our first breaths --